





THE END

Exeunt omnes.
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
For never was a story of more woe
Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished;
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;
The sun for sorrow will not show his head.
Prince. A glooming peace this morning with it brings.
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!
Cap. As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie-
As that of true and faithful Juliet.
There shall no figure at such rate be set
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
For I will raise her Statue in pure gold,
Mon. But I can give thee more;
Can I demand.
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
Cap. O brother Montague, give me thy hand.
Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punish'd.
And I, for winking at you, discords too,
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love!
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
Where be these enemies? Capulet, Montage,
Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
Of a poor pothecary, and therewithal
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
Their course of love, the tidings of her death;
Prince. This letter doth make good the friar's words,
And then I ran away to call the watch.
And by-and-by my master drew on him;
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.
Boy. He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
Where is the County's page that rais'd the watch?
Prince. Give me the letter. I will look on it.
If I departed not and left him there.
And threat'ned me with death, going in the vault,
This letter he early bid me give his father,
To this same place, to this same monument.
And then in post he came from Mantua
Bal. I brought my master news of Juliet's death;
Where's Romeo's man? What can he say in this?
Prince. We still have known thee for a holy man.
Unto the rigour of severest law.
Be sacrific'd, some hour before his time,
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
Her nurse is privy; and if aught in this
All this I know, and to the marriage
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,
And bear this work of heaven with patience;
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
But when I came, some minute ere the time
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;
At the prefixed hour of her waking
Return'd my letter back. Then all alone
Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
To help to take her from her borrowed grave,
That he should hither come as this dire night
The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo
As I intended, for it wrought on her
A sleeping potion; which so took effect
Then gave I her (so tutored by my art)
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
To rid her from this second marriage,
And with wild looks bid me devise some mean
To County Paris. Then comes she to me
Betroth'd and would have married her perforce
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pin'd.
Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from this city;
Was Tybalt's doomsday, whose untimely death
I married them; and their stol'n marriage day
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife.
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Friar. I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Prince. Then say it once what thou dost know in this.
Myself condemned and myself excus'd.
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
Doth make against me, of this direful murther;
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Friar. I am the greatest, able to do least,
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
And let mischance be slave to patience.
And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,
And then will I be general of your woes
And know their spring, their head, their true descent;
Till we can clear these ambiguities
Prince. Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
To press before thy father to a grave?
Mon. O thou untaught! what manners is in this,
Prince. Look, and thou shalt see.
What further woe conspires against mine age?
Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath.
Mon. Alas, my liege, my wife is dead to-night!
To see thy son and heir more early down.
Prince. Come, Montague; for thou art early up

Enter Montague [and others].

That warns my old age to a sepulchre.
Wife. O me! this sight of death is as a bell
And it missheathed in my daughter's bosom!
Is empty on the back of Montague,
This dagger hath mista'en, for, lo, his house
Cap. O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
These dead men's tombs.
With instruments upon them fit to open
Chief Watch. Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man,
Prince. Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
Warm and new kill'd.
And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,
Chief Watch. Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;
Prince. What fear is this which startles in our ears?
With open outcry, toward our monument.
Some 'Juliet,' and some 'Paris'; and all run,
Wife. The people in the street cry 'Romeo,'
Cap. What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?

Enter Capulet and his Wife [with others].

That calls our person from our morning rest?
Prince. What misadventure is so early up,

Enter the Prince [and Attendants].

Chief Watch. A great suspicion! Stay the friar too.
As he was coming from this churchyard side.
We took this mattock and this spade from him
3. Watch. Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.

Enter Friar [Laurence] and another Watchman.

Chief Watch. Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.
2. Watch. Here's Romeo's man. We found him in the churchyard.

Enter [some of the Watch,] with Romeo's Man [Balthasar].

We cannot without circumstance descry.
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
[Exeunt others of the Watch.]
Raise up the Montagues; some others search.
Go, tell the Prince; run to the Capulets;
Who here hath lain this two days buried.
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
Pitiful sight! here lies the County slain;
[Exeunt some of the Watch.]
Go, some of you; whoe'er you find attach.
churchyard.
Chief Watch. 'the ground is bloody. Search about the
Boy. This is the place. There, where the torch doth burn.

Enter [Paris's] Boy and Watch.

She stabs herself and falls [on Romeo's body].
This is thy sheath; there rest, and let me die.
[Snatches Romeo's dagger.]
Yea, noise? Then I'll be brief. O happy dagger!
Chief Watch. [within] Lead, boy. Which way?
Thy lips are warm!
To make me die with a restorative.             [Kisses him.]
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips.
O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.
What's here? A cup, clos'd in my true love's hand?
Exit [Friar].
Jul. Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming.
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.
And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
A greater power than we can contradict
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.
Friar. I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?
I do remember well where I should be,
Jul. O comfortable friar! where is my lord?
Juliet rises.
Is guilty of this lamentable chance! The lady stirs.
And steep'd in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?
To lie discolour'd by this place of peace? [Enters the tomb.]
What mean these masterless and gory swords
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains
Friar. Romeo!
And that my master slew him.
I dreamt my master and another fought,
Bal. As I did sleep under this yew tree here,
O, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing.
Friar. Stay then; I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me.
If I did stay to look on his intents.
And fearfully did menace me with death
My master knows not but I am gone hence,
Bal. I dare not, sir.
Friar. Go with me to the vault.
Bal. Full half an hour.
Friar. How long hath he been there?
Bal. Romeo.
Friar. Who is it?
One that you love.
Bal. It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,
It burneth in the Capels' monument.
To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern,
What torch is yond that vainly lends his light
Friar. Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,
Bal. Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?
Friar. Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night

Enter Friar [Laurence], with lanthorn, crow, and spade.

Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.          Falls.
Here's to my love! [Drinks.] O true apothecary!
The dashing rocks thy seasick weary bark!
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
Come, bitter conduct; come, unsavoury guide!
A dateless bargain to engrossing death!
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
Will I set up my everlasting rest
With worms that are thy chambermaids. O, here
Depart again. Here, here will I remain
And never from this palace of dim night
For fear of that I still will stay with thee
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
That unsubstantial Death is amorous,
Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe
Forgive me, cousin.' Ah, dear Juliet,
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
O, what more favour can I do to thee
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
Thou art not conquer'd. Beauty's ensign yet
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.
Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,
Call this a lightning? O my love! my wife!
A lightning before death. O, how may I
Have they been merry! which their keepers call
How oft when men are at the point of death
[Lays him in the tomb.]
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
A grave? O, no, a lanthorn, slaught'red youth,
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave.
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet
Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
He told me Paris should have married Juliet.
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
What said my man when my betossed soul
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
Rom. In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.                   [Dies.]
Par. O, I am slain! If thou be merciful,
[Exit. Paris falls.]
Page. O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.
They fight.
Rom. Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!
And apprehend thee for a felon here.
Par. I do defy thy, conjuration
A madman's mercy bid thee run away.
Stay not, be gone. Live, and hereafter say
For I come hither arm'd against myself.
By heaven, I love thee better than myself,
By urging me to fury. O, be gone!
But not another sin upon my head
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone;
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desp'rate man.
Rom. I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.
Can vengeance be pursu'd further than death?
Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Montague!
To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.
And here is come to do some villanous shame
It is supposed the fair creature died-
That murd'red my love's cousin- with which grief
Par. This is that banish'd haughty Montague
Romeo opens the tomb.
And in despite I'll cram thee with more food.
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
Gorg'd with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Rom. Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.        [Retires.]
Bal. [aside] For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout.
Live, and be prosperous; and farewell, good fellow.
Rom. So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.
Bal. I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
More fierce and more inexorable far
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
In what I farther shall intend to do,
But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
In dear employment. Therefore hence, be gone.
A precious ring- a ring that I must use
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
Is partly to behold my lady's face,
Why I descend into this bed of death
And do not interrupt me in my course.
Whate'er thou hearest or seest, stand all aloof
Give me the light. Upon thy life I charge thee,
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning
Rom. Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.

and a crow of iron.
Enter Romeo, and Balthasar with a torch, a mattock,

What, with a torch? Muffle me, night, awhile.     [Retires.]
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
What cursed foot wanders this way to-night
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
Whistle Boy.
Nightly shall be to strew, thy grave and weep.
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans.
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew;
(O woe! thy canopy is dust and stones)
Par. Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew
Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure.     [Retires.]
Page. [aside] I am almost afraid to stand alone
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
As signal that thou hear'st something approach.
But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me,
(Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves)
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread
Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground.
Under yond yew tree lay thee all along,
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Par. Give me thy torch, boy. Hence, and stand aloof.

Enter Paris and his Page with flowers and [a torch].

Verona. A churchyard; in it the monument of the Capulets.
Scene III.




Poor living corse, clos'd in a dead man's tomb!        Exit.
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come-
But I will write again to Mantua,
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
Laur. Now, must I to the monument alone.
John. Brother, I'll go and bring it thee.                 Exit.
Unto my cell.
Get me an iron crow and bring it straight
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence,
Of dear import; and the neglecting it
The letter was not nice, but full of charge,
Laur. Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,
So fearful were they of infection.
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
John. I could not send it- here it is again-
Laur. Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.
Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth,
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Suspecting that we both were in a house
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
Here in this city visiting the sick,
One of our order, to associate me
John. Going to find a barefoot brother out,
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?
Laur. This same should be the voice of Friar John.

Enter Friar Laurence.

John. Holy Franciscan friar, brother, ho!

Enter Friar John to Friar Laurence.

Verona. Friar Laurence's cell.
Scene II.




Exeunt.
To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
Farewell. Buy food and get thyself in flesh.
I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
Doing more murther in this loathsome world,
Rom. There is thy gold- worse poison to men's souls,
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
And drink it off, and if you had the strength
Apoth. Put this in any liquid thing you will
Rom. I pay thy poverty and not thy will.
Apoth. My poverty but not my will consents.
Then be not poor, but break it and take this.
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law;
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back:
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
And fearest to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,
Rom. Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness
Is death to any he that utters them.
Apoth. Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
As violently as hasty powder fir'd
And that the trunk may be discharg'd of breath
That the life-weary taker mall fall dead,
As will disperse itself through all the veins
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have
Rom. Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.
Apoth. Who calls so loud?

Enter Apothecary.

apothecary!
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut. What, ho!
As I remember, this should be the house.
And this same needy man must sell it me.
O, this same thought did but forerun my need,
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.'
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
'An if a man did need a poison now
Noting this penury, to myself I said,
Were thinly scattered, to make up a show.
Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses
Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
An alligator stuff'd, and other skins
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones;
Culling of simples. Meagre were his looks,
In tatt'red weeds, with overwhelming brows,
And hereabouts 'a dwells, which late I noted
I do remember an apothecary,
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
Let's see for means. O mischief, thou art swift
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
Exit [Balthasar].
And hire those horses. I'll be with thee straight.
Rom. No matter. Get thee gone
Man. No, my good lord.
Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
Leave me and do the thing I bid thee do.
Rom. Tush, thou art deceiv'd.
Some misadventure.
Your looks are pale and wild and do import
Man. I do beseech you, sir, have patience.
And hire posthorses. I will hence to-night.
Thou knowest my lodging. Get me ink and paper
Rom. Is it e'en so? Then I defy you, stars!
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
And presently took post to tell it you.
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault
And her immortal part with angels lives.
Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
Man. Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.
For nothing can be ill if she be well.
How fares my Juliet? That I ask again,
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
News from Verona! How now, Balthasar?

Enter Romeo's Man Balthasar, booted.

When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!
Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,
That I reviv'd and was an emperor.
And breath'd such life with kisses in my lips
(Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think!)
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
Rom. If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep

Enter Romeo.

Mantua. A street.
ACT V. Scene I.





Exeunt.
mourners, and stay dinner.
2. Mus. Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here, tarry for the
1. Mus. What a pestilent knave is this same?

With speedy help doth lend redress.'         [Exit.
'Then music with her silver sound

for sounding.
gold
is 'music with her silver sound' because musicians have no
you. It
Pet. O, I cry you mercy! you are the singer. I will say for
3. Mus. Faith, I know not what to say.
Pet. Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?
silver.
2. Mus. I say 'silver sound' because musicians sound for
Pet. Pretty! What say You, Hugh Rebeck?
1. Mus. Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
What say you, Simon Catling?
Why 'silver sound'? Why 'music with her silver sound'?

Then music with her silver sound'-
And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
'When griping grief the heart doth wound,

wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.
iron
Pet. Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you with an
2. Mus. Pray you put up your dagger, and put out your wit.
1. Mus. An you re us and fa us, you note us.
me?
note
I will carry no crotchets. I'll re you, I'll fa you. Do you
pate.
Pet. Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on your
1. Mus. Then will I give you the serving-creature.
minstrel.
Pet. No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the
1. Mus. What will you give us?
Pet. I will then give it you soundly.
1. Mus. No.
Pet. You will not then?
1. Mus. Not a dump we! 'Tis no time to play now.
of woe.' O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.
full
Pet. O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My heart is
1. Mus. Why 'Heart's ease'',
O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'
Pet. Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease,' 'Heart's ease'!

Enter Peter.

1. Mus. Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
For well you know this is a pitiful case.            [Exit.]
Nurse. Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up!
1. Mus. Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.
Exeunt. Manent Musicians [and Nurse].
Move them no more by crossing their high will.
The heavens do low'r upon you for some ill;
To follow this fair corse unto her grave.
And go, Sir Paris. Every one prepare
Friar. Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;
And all things change them to the contrary.
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse;
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast;
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Turn from their office to black funeral-
Cap. All things that we ordained festival
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.
For though fond nature bids us all lament,
In all her best array bear her to church;
On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
Dry up your tears and stick your rosemary
But she's best married that dies married young.
She's not well married that lives married long,
That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
O, in this love, you love your child so ill
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
And weep ye now, seeing she is advanc'd
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanc'd;
The most you sought was her promotion,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
And all the better is it for the maid.
Had part in this fair maid! now heaven hath all,
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
Friar. Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion's cure lives not
And with my child my joys are buried!
Dead art thou, dead! alack, my child is dead,
O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
To murther, murther our solemnity?
Uncomfortable time, why cam'st thou now
Cap. Despis'd, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!
O love! O life! not life, but love in death
By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
Most detestable Death, by thee beguil'd,
Par. Beguil'd, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
O woful day! O woful day!
Never was seen so black a day as this.
O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
That ever ever I did yet behold!
Most lamentable day, most woful day
Nurse. O woe? O woful, woful, woful day!
And cruel Death hath catch'd it from my sight!
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
Mother. Accurs'd, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
And doth it give me such a sight as this?
Par. Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death's.
My daughter he hath wedded. I will die
Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir;
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Hath Death lain with thy wife. See, there she lies,
O son, the night before thy wedding day
Cap. Ready to go, but never to return.
Friar. Come, is the bride ready to go to church?

Enter Friar [Laurence] and the County [Paris], with Musicians.

Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.
Cap. Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
Mother. O woful time!
Nurse. O lamentable day!
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Life and these lips have long been separated.
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;
Cap. Ha! let me see her. Out alas! she's cold,
Mother. Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
Nurse. She's dead, deceas'd; she's dead! Alack the day!
Father. For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.

Enter Father.

Help, help! Call help.
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
Mother. O me, O me! My child, my only life!
Nurse. Look, look! O heavy day!
Mother. What is the matter?
Nurse. O lamentable day!
Mother. What noise is here?

Enter Mother.

Some aqua-vitae, ho! My lord! my lady!
O weraday that ever I was born!
Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady's dead!
I must needs wake you. Lady! lady! lady!
What, dress'd, and in your clothes, and down again?
[Draws aside the curtains.]
He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?
Ay, let the County take you in your bed!
I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
Marry, and amen. How sound is she asleep!
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me!
The County Paris hath set up his rest
Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now!
Why, love, I say! madam! sweetheart! Why, bride!
Why, lamb! why, lady! Fie, you slug-abed!
she.
Nurse. Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! Fast, I warrant her,

[Enter Nurse.]

Juliet's chamber.
Scene V.




[Exeunt.]
Make haste, I say.
Make haste! The bridegroom he is come already:
I'll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,
Go waken Juliet; go and trim her up.
Enter Nurse.

Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, nurse, I say!
I hear him near.
For so he said he would.                         Play music.
The County will be here with music straight,
day.
Thou shalt be loggerhead. [Exit Fellow.] Good faith, 'tis
Cap. Mass, and well said; a merry whoreson, ha!
And never trouble Peter for the matter.
Fellow. I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
Call Peter; he will show thee where they are.
logs.
Cap. Make haste, make haste. [Exit Fellow.] Sirrah, fetch drier
Fellow. Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.
What is there? Now, fellow,

Enter three or four [Fellows, with spits and logs and baskets.

Cap. A jealous hood, a jealous hood!
Exeunt Lady and Nurse.
But I will watch you from such watching now.
Lady. Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.
Cap. No, not a whit. What, I have watch'd ere now
For this night's watching.
Get you to bed! Faith, you'll be sick to-morrow
Nurse. Go, you cot-quean, go,
Spare not for cost.
Look to the bak'd meats, good Angelica;
The curfew bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock.
Cap. Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crow'd,

Enter Old Capulet.

Nurse. They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
Lady. Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, nurse.

Enter Lady of the House and Nurse.

Capulet's house.
Scene IV.




She [drinks and] falls upon her bed within the curtains.

Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.
Upon a rapier's point. Stay, Tybalt, stay!
Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body
O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost
As with a club dash out my desp'rate brains?
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud.,
And madly play with my forefathers' joints,
Environed with all these hideous fears,
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad-
And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,
So early waking- what with loathsome smells,
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
At some hours in the night spirits resort-
Lies fest'ring in his shroud; where, as they say,
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Of all my buried ancestors are pack'd;
Where for this many hundred years the bones
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle
Together with the terror of the place-
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Or, if I live, is it not very like
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point!
I wake before the time that Romeo
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
I will not entertain so bad a thought.
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
I fear it is; and yet methinks it should not,
Because he married me before to Romeo?
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd
Subtilly hath minist'red to have me dead,
What if it be a poison which the friar
Lays down a dagger.
No, No! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?
What if this mixture do not work at all?
Come, vial.
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Nurse!- What should she do here?
I'll call them back again to comfort me.
That almost freezes up the heat of life.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins
Jul. Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.
Exeunt [Mother and Nurse.]
Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.
Mother. Good night.
In this so sudden business.
For I am sure you have your hands full all
And let the nurse this night sit up with you;
So please you, let me now be left alone,
As are behooffull for our state to-morrow.
Jul. No, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries
Mother. What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?

Enter Mother.

Which, well thou knowest, is cross and full of sin.
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
For I have need of many orisons
I pray thee leave me to myself to-night;
Jul. Ay, those attires are best; but, gentle nurse,

Enter Juliet and Nurse.

Juliet's chamber.
Scene III.




Exeunt.
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.
Against to-morrow. My heart is wondrous light,
To County Paris, to prepare him up
They are all forth; well, I will walk myself
I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
I'll not to bed to-night; let me alone.
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.
Cap. Tush, I will stir about,
'Tis now near night.
Mother. We shall be short in our provision.
Exeunt Juliet and Nurse.
Cap. Go, nurse, go with her. We'll to church to-morrow.
Mother. No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
As you think fit to furnish me to-morrow?
To help me sort such needful ornaments
Jul. Nurse, will you go with me into my closet
All our whole city is much bound to him.
Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
This is as't should be. Let me see the County.
Cap. Why, I am glad on't. This is well. Stand up.
Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.
And gave him what becomed love I might,
Jul. I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell
I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.
Cap. Send for the County. Go tell him of this.
Henceforward I am ever rul'd by you.
To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you!
By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here
To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd
Of disobedient opposition
Jul. Where I have learnt me to repent the sin
Cap. How now, my headstrong? Where have you been gadding?
Nurse. See where she comes from shrift with merry look.

Enter Juliet.

A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.
Cap. Well, be may chance to do some good on her.
Nurse. Ay, forsooth.
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?
We shall be much unfurnish'd for this time.
Exit Servingman.
Cap. Go, begone.
me.
with
fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not
Serv. Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own
Cap. How canst thou try them so?
their fingers.
lick
Serv. You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they can
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
[Exit a Servingman.]
Cap. So many guests invite as here are writ.

two or three.
Enter Father Capulet, Mother, Nurse, and Servingmen,

Capulet's house.
Scene II.




Exeunt.
Farewell, dear father.
Jul. Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.
In this resolve. I'll send a friar with speed
Friar. Hold! Get you gone, be strong and prosperous
Jul. Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
Abate thy valour in the acting it.
If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear
And this shall free thee from this present shame,
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
And hither shall he come; and he and I
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift;
In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
In thy best robes uncovered on the bier
Then, as the manner of our country is,
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Thou shalt continue two-and-forty hours,
And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death;
Each part, depriv'd of supple government,
Like death when he shuts up the day of life;
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease;
A cold and drowsy humour; for no pulse
When presently through all thy veins shall run
And this distilled liquor drink thou off;
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
Let not the nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
To-morrow night look that thou lie alone;
To marry Paris. Wednesday is to-morrow.
Friar. Hold, then. Go home, be merry, give consent
To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble-
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud-
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;
O'ercover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
Or shut me nightly in a charnel house,
Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears,
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
From off the battlements of yonder tower,
Jul. O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
And, if thou dar'st, I'll give thee remedy.
That cop'st with death himself to scape from it;
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
If, rather than to marry County Paris
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
Which craves as desperate an execution
Friar. Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope,
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
Be not so long to speak. I long to die
Could to no issue of true honour bring.
Which the commission of thy years and art
Shall play the empire, arbitrating that
'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Give me some present counsel; or, behold,
Therefore, out of thy long-experienc'd time,
Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Shall be the label to another deed,
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's seal'd,
God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
And with this knife I'll help it presently.
Do thou but call my resolution wise
If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
Jul. Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
On Thursday next be married to this County.
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
It strains me past the compass of my wits.
Friar. Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;
Come weep with me- past hope, past cure, past help!
Jul. O, shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.             Exit.
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye.
Par. God shield I should disturb devotion!
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
Friar. My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
Or shall I come to you at evening mass
Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
Jul. It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Par. Thy face is mine, and thou hast sland'red it.
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
Jul. That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;
Par. Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.
For it was bad enough before their spite.
Jul. The tears have got small victory by that,
Par. Poor soul, thy face is much abus'd with tears.
Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.
Jul. If I do so, it will be of more price,
Par. So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
Jul. I will confess to you that I love him.
Par. Do not deny to him that you love me.
Jul. To answer that, I should confess to you.
Par. Come you to make confession to this father?
Friar. That's a certain text.
Jul. What must be shall be.
Par. That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.
Jul. That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
Par. Happily met, my lady and my wife!

Enter Juliet.

Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
Friar. [aside] I would I knew not why it should be slow'd.-
Now do you know the reason of this haste.
May be put from her by society.
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
To stop the inundation of her tears,
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage
That she do give her sorrow so much sway,
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
Par. Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
Uneven is the course; I like it not.
Friar. You say you do not know the lady's mind.
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
Par. My father Capulet will have it so,
Friar. On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.

Enter Friar, [Laurence] and County Paris.

Friar Laurence's cell.
ACT IV. Scene I.



If all else fail, myself have power to die.            Exit.
I'll to the friar to know his remedy.
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor!
Which she hath prais'd him with above compare
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Jul. Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
Nurse. Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.           Exit.
To make confession and to be absolv'd.
Having displeas'd my father, to Laurence' cell,
Go in; and tell my lady I am gone,
Jul. Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
Nurse. What?
Jul. Amen!
Nurse. And from my soul too; else beshrew them both.
Jul. Speak'st thou this from thy heart?
As living here and you no use of him.
Your first is dead- or 'twere as good he were
For it excels your first; or if it did not,
I think you are happy in this second match,
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
Romeo's a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
O, he's a lovely gentleman!
I think it best you married with the County.
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;
Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing
Nurse. Faith, here it is.
Some comfort, nurse.
What say'st thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
Upon so soft a subject as myself!
Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
By leaving earth? Comfort me, counsel me.
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
How shall that faith return again to earth
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven.
Jul. O God!- O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.            Exit.
Lady. Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word.
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
Or if you do not, make the bridal bed
Delay this marriage for a month, a week;
O sweet my mother, cast me not away!
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
Jul. Is there no pity sitting in the clouds
Trust to't. Bethink you. I'll not be forsworn.         Exit.
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:
Look to't, think on't; I do not use to jest.
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
But, an you will not wed, I'll pardon you.
I am too young, I pray you pardon me'!
To answer 'I'll not wed, I cannot love;
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man-
Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,
A gentleman of princely parentage,
To have her match'd; and having now provided
Waking or sleeping, still my care hath been
At home, abroad, alone, in company,
Cap. God's bread I it makes me mad. Day, night, late, early,
Lady. You are too hot.
For here we need it not.
Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl,
Cap. Peace, you mumbling fool!
Nurse. May not one speak?
Cap. O, God-i-god-en!
Nurse. I speak no treason.
Good Prudence. Smatter with your gossips, go!
Cap. And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue,
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
Nurse. God in heaven bless her!
Out on her, hilding!
And that we have a curse in having her.
But now I see this one is one too much,
That God had lent us but this only child;
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me!
Or never after look me in the face.
I tell thee what- get thee to church a Thursday
Cap. Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
Jul. Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Lady. Fie, fie! what, are you mad?
You tallow-face!
Out, you green-sickness carrion I out, you baggage!
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
And yet 'not proud'? Mistress minion you,
'Proud'- and 'I thank you'- and 'I thank you not'-
Cap. How, how, how, how, choplogic? What is this?
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.
Proud can I never be of what I hate,
Jul. Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blest,
How? Will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?
Cap. Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.
I would the fool were married to her grave!
Lady. Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
Have you delivered to her our decree?
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife?
Without a sudden calm will overset
Who, raging with thy tears and they with them,
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs,
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind:
Evermore show'ring? In one little body
How now? a conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
It rains downright.
But for the sunset of my brother's son
Cap. When the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew,

Enter Capulet and Nurse.

And see how be will take it at your hands.
Lady. Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself,
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swear
I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
He shall not make me there a joyful bride!
Jul. Now by Saint Peter's Church, and Peter too,
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
Lady. Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn
Jul. Madam, in happy time! What day is that?
That thou expects not nor I look'd not for.
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
Lady. Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?
Jul. And joy comes well in such a needy time.
But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
Lady. Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
Upon his body that hath slaughter'd him!
To wreak the love I bore my cousin Tybalt
To hear him nam'd and cannot come to him,
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
To bear a poison, I would temper it;
Madam, if you could find out but a man
Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vex'd.
With Romeo till I behold him- dead-
Jul. Indeed I never shall be satisfied
And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company;
Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram
Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
Lady. We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!
Jul. Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.
Lady. That is because the traitor murderer lives.
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
God pardon him! I do, with all my heart;
Jul. [aside] Villain and he be many miles asunder.-
Lady. That same villain Romeo.
Jul. What villain, madam?
As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.
Lady. Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death
I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
Jul. Feeling so the loss,
Which you weep for.
Lady. So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Jul. Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of love;
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
Lady. Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
Jul. Madam, I am not well.
Lady. Why, how now, Juliet?

Enter Mother.

What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
Jul. Who is't that calls? It is my lady mother.
Lady. [within] Ho, daughter! are you up?
But send him back.
For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long
That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, Fortune,
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
Jul. O Fortune, Fortune! all men call thee fickle.
Exit.
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!
Rom. And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.
Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,
Jul. O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
For sweet discourses in our time to come.
Rom. I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
Jul. O, think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
I will omit no opportunity
Rom. Farewell!
Ere I again behold my Romeo!
O, by this count I shall be much in years
For in a minute there are many days.
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
Jul. Art thou gone so, my lord, my love, my friend?
He goeth down.
Rom. Farewell, farewell! One kiss, and I'll descend.
[Exit.]
Jul. Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
The day is broke; be wary, look about.
Nurse. Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
Jul. Nurse?
Nurse. Madam!

Enter Nurse.

Rom. More light and light- more dark and dark our woes!
O, now be gone! More light and light it grows.
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day!
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
O, now I would they had chang'd voices too,
Some say the lark and loathed toad chang'd eyes;
This doth not so, for she divideth us.
Some say the lark makes sweet division;
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
Jul. It is, it is! Hie hence, be gone, away!
How is't, my soul? Let's talk; it is not day.
Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.
I have more care to stay than will to go.
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;
I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
Rom. Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death.
Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.
And light thee on the way to Mantua.
To be to thee this night a torchbearer
It is some meteor that the sun exhales
Jul. Yond light is not daylight; I know it, I.
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder East.
No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
Rom. It was the lark, the herald of the morn;
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree.
That pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear.
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
Jul. Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.

Enter Romeo and Juliet aloft, at the Window.

Capulet's orchard.
Scene V.




Exeunt
Good night.
That we may call it early by-and-by.
Afore me, It is so very very late
Farewell, My lord.- Light to my chamber, ho!
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed;
Cap. Well, get you gone. A Thursday be it then.
Par. My lord, I would that Thursday were to-morrow.
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much.
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
We'll keep no great ado- a friend or two;
Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?
She shall be married to this noble earl.
Thursday let it be- a Thursday, tell her
Cap. Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.
Par. Monday, my lord.
But, soft! what day is this?
And bid her (mark you me?) on Wednesday next-
Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;
In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not.
Of my child's love. I think she will be rul'd
Cap. Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
To-night she's mew'd up to her heaviness.
Lady. I will, and know her mind early to-morrow;
Madam, good night. Commend me to your daughter.
Par. These times of woe afford no tune to woo.
I would have been abed an hour ago.
I promise you, but for your company,
'Tis very late; she'll not come down to-night.
And so did I. Well, we were born to die.
Look you, she lov'd her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
That we have had no time to move our daughter.
Cap. Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily

Enter Old Capulet, his Wife, and Paris.

Capulet's house
Scene IV.




Exeunt.
Farewell.
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
Rom. But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
Give me thy hand. 'Tis late. Farewell; good night.
Every good hap to you that chances here.
And he shall signify from time to time
Sojourn in Mantua. I'll find out your man,
Or by the break of day disguis'd from hence.
Either be gone before the watch be set,
Friar. Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state:
Rom. How well my comfort is reviv'd by this!
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.           Exit.
Nurse. Here is a ring she bid me give you, sir.
Rom. Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!
Nurse. O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night
Romeo is coming.
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Go before, nurse. Commend me to thy lady,
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her.
Go get thee to thy love, as was decreed,
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love.
But, like a misbhav'd and sullen wench,
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
A pack of blessings light upon thy back;
And turns it to exile. There art thou happy.
The law, that threat'ned death, becomes thy friend
But thou slewest Tybalt. There art thou happy too.
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead.
What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive,
And thou dismemb'red with thine own defence.
is get afire by thine own ignorance,
Like powder in a skilless soldier's flask,
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Digressing from the valour of a man;
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.
And usest none in that true use indeed
Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
Since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meet
Why railest thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
And slay thy lady that in thy life lives,
Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself?
I thought thy disposition better temper'd.
Thou hast amaz'd me. By my holy order,
Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Unseemly woman in a seeming man!
The unreasonable fury of a beast.
Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote
Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art;
Friar. Hold thy desperate hand.
The hateful mansion.                     [Draws his dagger.]
Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
In what vile part of this anatomy
Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,
Did murther her; as that name's cursed hand
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Rom. As if that name,
And then down falls again.
And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
Nurse. O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?
Where is she? and how doth she! and what says
With blood remov'd but little from her own?
Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
Doth not she think me an old murtherer,
Rom. Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
Nurse. Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.
Rom. (rises) Nurse-
Why should you fall into so deep an O?
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand!
Stand up, stand up! Stand, an you be a man.
Blubb'ring and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
Nurse. Even so lies she,
Piteous predicament!
Friar. O woeful sympathy!
Just in her case!
Nurse. O, he is even in my mistress' case,
Friar. There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?
Nurse. O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar

Enter Nurse.

Friar. Welcome then.
I come from Lady Juliet.
Nurse. [within] Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.
Who knocks so hard? Whence come you? What's your will
What simpleness is this.- I come, I come!             Knock.
Run to my study.- By-and-by!- God's will,
Thou wilt be taken.- Stay awhile!- Stand up;          Knock.
Friar. Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise;
Mist-like infold me from the search of eyes.          Knock.
Rom. Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans,
Friar. Arise; one knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.
Knock [within].
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
Doting like me, and like me banished,
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
Rom. Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
Friar. Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
Rom. How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
Friar. O, then I see that madmen have no ears.
It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Rom. Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy!
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.
Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
Friar. I'll give thee armour to keep off that word;
Rom. O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
Friar. Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.
To mangle me with that word 'banished'?
A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
Howling attends it! How hast thou the heart,
O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
But 'banished' to kill me- 'banished'?
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,
And sayest thou yet that exile is not death?
They are free men, but I am banished.
This may flies do, when I from this must fly;
But Romeo may not- he is banished.
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
Who, even in pure and vestal modesty,
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize
More honourable state, more courtship lives
But Romeo may not. More validity,
Live here in heaven and may look on her;
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog
Rom. 'Tis torture, and not mercy. Heaven is here,
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
And turn'd that black word death to banishment.
Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,
Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind Prince,
Friar. O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
Thou cut'st my head off with a golden axe
Is death misterm'd. Calling death 'banishment,'
And world's exile is death. Then 'banishment'
Hence banished is banish'd from the world,
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Rom. There is no world without Verona walls,
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
Friar. Hence from Verona art thou banished.
Much more than death. Do not say 'banishment.'
For exile hath more terror in his look,
Rom. Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say 'death';
Not body's death, but body's banishment.
Friar. A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips-
Rom. What less than doomsday is the Prince's doom?
I bring thee tidings of the Prince's doom.
Is my dear son with such sour company.
Friar. Too familiar
That I yet know not?
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand
Rom. Father, what news? What is the Prince's doom

Enter Romeo.

And thou art wedded to calamity.
Affliction is enanmour'd of thy parts,
Friar. Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.

Enter Friar [Laurence].

Friar Laurence's cell.
Scene III.




Exeunt.
And bid him come to take his last farewell.
Jul. O, find him! give this ring to my true knight
I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.
To comfort you. I wot well where he is.
Nurse. Hie to your chamber. I'll find Romeo
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
Come, cords; come, nurse. I'll to my wedding bed;
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
He made you for a highway to my bed;
Both you and I, for Romeo is exil'd.
Take up those cords. Poor ropes, you are beguil'd,
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
Jul. Wash they his wounds with tears? Mine shall be spent,
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
Nurse. Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse.
Where is my father and my mother, nurse?
In that word's death; no words can that woe sound.
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished'-
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
'Romeo is banished'- to speak that word
But with a rearward following Tybalt's death,
Which modern lamentation might have mov'd?
Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,
Why followed not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,'
And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
Was woe enough, if it had ended there;
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo- banished.'
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds!
But O, it presses to my memory
That murd'red me. I would forget it fain;
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband.
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring!
That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband.
But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name
Jul. Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Nurse. Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd
Upon his brow shame is asham'd to sit;
For such a wish! He was not born to shame.
Jul. Blister'd be thy tongue
Shame come to Romeo!
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
Ah, where's my man? Give me some aqua vitae.
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
No faith, no honesty in men; all perjur'd,
Nurse. There's no trust,
In such a gorgeous palace!
So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell
Was ever book containing such vile matter
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st-
Despised substance of divinest show!
Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Jul. O serpent heart, hid with a flow'ring face!
Nurse. It did, it did! alas the day, it did!
Jul. O God! Did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?
Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.
Nurse. Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;
For who is living, if those two are gone?
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
My dear-lov'd cousin, and my dearer lord?
Is Romeo slaught'red, and is Tybalt dead?
Jul. What storm is this that blows so contrary?
That ever I should live to see thee dead!
O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman
Nurse. O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!
Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here,
To prison, eyes; ne'er look on liberty!
Jul. O, break, my heart! poor bankrout, break at once!
All in gore-blood. I swounded at the sight.
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
(God save the mark!) here on his manly breast.
Nurse. I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
If be be slain, say 'I'; or if not, 'no.'
Or those eyes shut that make thee answer 'I.'
I am not I, if there be such an 'I';
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.
And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more
Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but 'I,'
This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
Jul. What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo!
Nurse. Romeo can,
Jul. Can heaven be so envious?
Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!
We are undone, lady, we are undone!
Nurse. Ah, weraday! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
Jul. Ay me! what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands
[Throws them down.]
Nurse. Ay, ay, the cords.
That Romeo bid thee fetch?
Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords
But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.
And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks

Enter Nurse, with cords.

And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,
To an impatient child that hath new robes
As is the night before some festival
Not yet enjoy'd. So tedious is this day
But not possess'd it; and though I am sold,
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
That all the world will be in love with night
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,
Come, gentle night; come, loving, black-brow'd night;
Whiter than new snow upon a raven's back.
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;
Think true love acted simple modesty.
With thy black mantle till strange love, grown bold,
Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks,
Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.
And learn me how to lose a winning match,
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
Leap to these arms untalk'd of and unseen.
That runaway eyes may wink, and Romeo
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
As Phaeton would whip you to the West
Towards Phoebus' lodging! Such a wagoner
Jul. Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,

Enter Juliet alone.

Capulet's orchard.
Scene II.




Exeunt.
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
Bear hence this body, and attend our will.
Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,
Immediately we do exile him hence.
Prince. And for that offence
The life of Tybalt.
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
Mon. Not Romeo, Prince; he was Mercutio's friend;
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
Prince. Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.
Romeo slew Tybalt; Romeo must not live.
I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give.
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
Affection makes him false, he speaks not true.
Cap. Wife. He is a kinsman to the Montague;
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain;
And to't they go like lightning; for, ere I
Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,
But by-and-by comes back to Romeo,
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled;
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and swifter than his tongue,
Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud,
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
Cold death aside and with the other sends
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast;
Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd-
Your high displeasure. All this- uttered
How nice the quarrel was, and urg'd withal
Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
Ben. Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did stay.
Prince. Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
O cousin, cousin!
For blood of ours shed blood of Montague.
Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
O Prince! O husband! O, the blood is spill'd
Cap. Wife. Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.
Ben. O noble Prince. I can discover all
Prince. Where are the vile beginners of this fray?

and [others].
Enter Prince [attended], Old Montague, Capulet, their Wives,

I charge thee in the Prince's name obey.
Citizen. Up, sir, go with me.
Ben. There lies that Tybalt.
Tybalt, that murtherer, which way ran he?
Citizen. Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?

Enter Citizens.
Exit Romeo.
Ben. Why dost thou stay?
Rom. O, I am fortune's fool!
If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!
Stand not amaz'd. The Prince will doom thee death
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
Ben. Romeo, away, be gone!
They fight. Tybalt falls.
Rom. This shall determine that.
Shalt with him hence.
Tyb. Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
Staying for thine to keep him company.
Is but a little way above our heads,
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
Now, Tybalt, take the 'villain' back again
And fire-ey'd fury be my conduct now!
Away to heaven respective lenity,
Rom. Alive in triumph, and Mercutio slain?
Ben. Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.

Enter Tybalt.

This but begins the woe others must end.
Rom. This day's black fate on moe days doth depend;
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
That gallant spirit hath aspir'd the clouds,
Ben. O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!

Enter Benvolio.

And in my temper soft'ned valour's steel
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
Hath been my kinsman. O sweet Juliet,
With Tybalt's slander- Tybalt, that an hour
In my behalf- my reputation stain'd
My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt
Rom. This gentleman, the Prince's near ally,
[Exit. [supported by Benvolio].
And soundly too. Your houses!
They have made worms' meat of me. I have it,
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
Mer. Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Rom. I thought all for the best.
came you between us? I was hurt under your arm.
villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil
a
mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a rogue,
world. A plague o' both your houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a
shall find me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this
but 'tis enough, 'twill serve. Ask for me to-morrow, and you
door;
Mer. No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church
Rom. Courage, man. The hurt cannot be much.
[Exit Page.]
Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
Mer. Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, 'tis enough.
Ben. What, art thou hurt?
Is he gone and hath nothing?
A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.
Mer. I am hurt.
[with his Followers].
Tybalt under Romeo's arm thrusts Mercutio in, and flies
Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.
Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath
Gentlemen, for shame! forbear this outrage!
Rom. Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
[They fight.]
Mer. Come, sir, your passado!
Rom. Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
Tyb. I am for you.                                    [Draws.]
ere it be out.
ears
his pitcher by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your
of
dry-beat the rest of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out

mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter,
That I
Mer. Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives.
Tyb. What wouldst thou have with me?
Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?
Alla stoccata carries it away.                      [Draws.]
Mer. O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.
And so good Capulet, which name I tender
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love;
But love thee better than thou canst devise
Rom. I do protest I never injur'd thee,
That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.
Tyb. Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
Therefore farewell. I see thou knowest me not.
To such a greeting. Villain am I none.
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
Rom. Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
No better term than this: thou art a villain.
Tyb. Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
Your worship in that sense may call him man.
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower!
Mer. But I'll be hang'd, sir, if he wear your livery.
Tyb. Well, peace be with you, sir. Here comes my man.

Enter Romeo.

I will not budge for no man's pleasure,
Mer. Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.
And reason coldly of your grievances,
Either withdraw unto some private place
Ben. We talk here in the public haunt of men.
consort!
fiddlestick; here's that shall make you dance. Zounds,
minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords. Here's my
Mer. Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? An thou make
Tyb. Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.
Mer. Could you not take some occasion without giving
occasion.
give me
Tyb. You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will
Couple it with something; make it a word and a blow.
Mer. And but one word with one of us?
Gentlemen, good den. A word with one of you.
Tyb. Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
Mer. By my heel, I care not.
Ben. By my head, here come the Capulets.

Enter Tybalt and others.

Mer. The fee simple? O simple!
the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
buy
Ben. An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should
tutor me from quarrelling!
for tying his new shoes with an old riband? And yet thou wilt
another
tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter, with
hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a
that
for coughing in the street, because he hath wakened thy dog
man
addle as an egg for quarrelling. Thou hast quarrell'd with a
an egg is full of meat; and yet thy head hath been beaten as
as
would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of quarrels
eye
reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an
other
Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no
hast.
that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou
man
one would kill the other. Thou! why, thou wilt quarrel with a
for
Mer. Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly,
Ben. And what to?
moved.
Italy; and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be
Mer. Come, come, thou art as hot a jack in thy mood as any in
Ben. Am I like such a fellow?
cup draws him on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.
second
'God send me no need of thee!' and by the operation of the
says
confines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table and
the
Mer. Thou art like one of these fellows that, when he enters
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
And if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl,
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad.
Ben. I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire.

Enter Mercutio, Benvolio, and Men.

A public place.
ACT III. Scene I.




[Exeunt.]
Till Holy Church incorporate two in one.
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
Friar. Come, come with me, and we will make short work;
cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
But my true love is grown to such excess
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
Brags of his substance, not of ornament.
Jul. Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Receive in either by this dear encounter.
Unfold the imagin'd happiness that both
This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
Be heap'd like mine, and that thy skill be more
Rom. Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Jul. As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
Friar. Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
Jul. Good even to my ghostly confessor.
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.
That idles in the wanton summer air,
A lover may bestride the gossamer
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.
Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot

Enter Juliet.

Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
Therefore love moderately: long love doth so;
And in the taste confounds the appetite.
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
Friar. These violent delights have violent ends
It is enough I may but call her mine.
Then love-devouring death do what he dare-
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
Rom. Amen, amen! But come what sorrow can,
That after-hours with sorrow chide us not!
Friar. So smile the heavens upon this holy act

Enter Friar [Laurence] and Romeo.

Friar Laurence's cell.
Scene VI.




Exeunt.
Jul. Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
Go; I'll to dinner; hie you to the cell.
But you shall bear the burthen soon at night.
I am the drudge, and toil in your delight;
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark.
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
Hie you to church; I must another way,
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks:
There stays a husband to make you a wife.
Nurse. Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell;
Jul. I have.
Nurse. Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?
Jul. Here's such a coil! Come, what says Romeo?
Henceforward do your messages yourself.
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Are you so hot? Marry come up, I trow.
Nurse. O God's Lady dear!
"Where is your mother?"'
'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
Jul. Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
your mother?
is
and a kind, and a handsome; and, I warrant, a virtuous- Where
courteous,
Nurse. Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a
Sweet, sweet, Sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?
Jul. I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
To catch my death with jauncing up and down!
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
My back o' t' other side,- ah, my back, my back!
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
Nurse. Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
What says he of our marriage? What of that?
Jul. No, no. But all this did I know before.
What, have you din'd at home?
God.
warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways, wench; serve
are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy, but, I'll
they
foot, and a body, though they be not to be talk'd on, yet
any man's, yet his leg excels all men's; and for a hand and a
than
choose a man. Romeo? No, not he. Though his face be better
Nurse. Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not how to
Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance.
Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that.
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
Jul. How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath
Do you not see that I am out of breath?
Nurse. Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?
Nay, come, I pray thee speak. Good, good nurse, speak.
Jul. I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.
Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunce have I had!
Nurse. I am aweary, give me leave awhile.
By playing it to me with so sour a face.
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
Jul. Now, good sweet nurse- O Lord, why look'st thou sad?
[Exit Peter.]
Nurse. Peter, stay at the gate.
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.
O God, she comes! O honey nurse, what news?

Enter Nurse [and Peter].

Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
But old folks, many feign as they were dead-
And his to me,
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
Is three long hours; yet she is not come.
Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw Love,
Driving back shadows over low'ring hills.
Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams
O, she is lame! Love's heralds should be thoughts,
Perchance she cannot meet him. That's not so.
In half an hour she 'promis'd to return.
Jul. The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;

Enter Juliet.

Capulet's orchard.
Scene V.




Exeunt.
Nurse. Peter, take my fan, and go before, and apace.
Peter. Anon.
Nurse. Ay, a thousand times. [Exit Romeo.] Peter!
Rom. Commend me to thy lady.
to hear it.
good
sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you
it begins with some other letter; and she hath the prettiest
know
Nurse. Ah, mocker! that's the dog's name. R is for the- No; I
Rom. Ay, nurse; what of that? Both with an R.
a letter?
with
in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both
clout
I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any
but
her sometimes, and tell her that Paris is the properer man;
anger
soul, had as lieve see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I
good
town, one Paris, that would fain lay knife aboard; but she,
when 'twas a little prating thing- O, there is a nobleman in
Nurse. Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord!
Rom. I warrant thee my man's as true as steel.
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
Nurse. Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,
Rom. What say'st thou, my dear nurse?
Nurse. Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.
Farewell. Be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains.
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Which to the high topgallant of my joy
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
Rom. And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall.
Nurse. This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.
Rom. Go to! I say you shall.
Nurse. No, truly, sir; not a penny.
Be shriv'd and married. Here is for thy pains.
And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;
Rom. Bid her devise
it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
take
Nurse. I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I
Rom. What wilt thou tell her, nurse? Thou dost not mark me.
Lord! she will be a joyful woman.
Nurse. Good heart, and I faith I will tell her as much. Lord,
thee-
Rom. Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto
dealing.
ill thing to be off'red to any gentlewoman, and very weak
an
therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were
behaviour, as they say; for the gentlewoman is young; and
kind of
into a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross
her
keep to myself; but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead
will
my young lady bid me enquire you out. What she bid me say, I
you,
quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word; and, as I told
Nurse. Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me
on my side.
law
as another man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the
soon
should quickly have been out, I warrant you. I dare draw as
weapon
Peter. I saw no man use you at his pleasure. If I had, my
by too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure!
stand
flirt-gills; I am none of his skains-mates. And thou must
I'll find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his
cannot,
were lustier than he is, and twenty such jacks; and if I
'a
Nurse. An 'a speak anything against me, I'll take him down, an
speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.
will
Rom. A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk and
this that was so full of his ropery?
was
Nurse. Marry, farewell! I Pray you, Sir, what saucy merchant
Exeunt Mercutio, Benvolio.
[sings] lady, lady, lady.
Mer. Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell,
Rom. I will follow you.
thither.
Romeo, will you come to your father's? We'll to dinner

When it hoars ere it be spent.
Is too much for a score
But a hare that is hoar
Is very good meat in Lent;
And an old hare hoar,
An old hare hoar,

He walks by them and sings.
something stale and hoar ere it be spent
Mer. No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is
Rom. What hast thou found?
Mer. A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!
Ben. She will endite him to some supper.
Nurse. If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.
wisely.
Mer. Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i' faith! wisely,
Nurse. You say well.
that name, for fault of a worse.
of
found him than he was when you sought him. I am the youngest
have
Rom. I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when you
Romeo?
young
'a? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the
quoth
Nurse. By my troth, it is well said. 'For himself to mar,'
Rom. One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to mar.
Nurse. Out upon you! What a man are you!
upon the prick of noon.
now
Mer. 'Tis no less, I tell ye; for the bawdy hand of the dial is
Nurse. Is it good-den?
Mer. God ye good-den, fair gentlewoman.
Nurse. God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
the two.
face of
Mer. Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the fairer
Nurse. My fan, Peter.
Peter. Anon.
Nurse. Peter!
Ben. Two, two! a shirt and a smock.
Mer. A sail, a sail!

Enter Nurse and her Man [Peter].

Rom. Here's goodly gear!
the argument no longer.
occupy
come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to
was
Mer. O, thou art deceiv'd! I would have made it short; for I
Ben. Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
Mer. Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
Ben. Stop there, stop there!
a hole.
bauble in
great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his
art as well as by nature. For this drivelling love is like a
art, by
thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art thou what thou
art
Mer. Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Now
goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
the
Rom. I stretch it out for that word 'broad,' which, added to
narrow to an ell broad!
Mer. O, here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch
Rom. And is it not, then, well serv'd in to a sweet goose?
sauce.
Mer. Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most sharp
Rom. Nay, good goose, bite not!
Mer. I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
for the goose.
there
Rom. Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not
have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?
sure, I
hast more of the wild goose in one of thy wits than, I am
thou
Mer. Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done; for
Rom. Swits and spurs, swits and spurs! or I'll cry a match.
Mer. Come between us, good Benvolio! My wits faint.
Rom. O single-sold jest, solely singular for the singleness!
remain, after the wearing, solely singular.
pump, that, when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may
thy
Mer. Well said! Follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out
Rom. Why, then is my pump well-flower'd.
Mer. Right.
Rom. Pink for flower.
Mer. Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
Rom. A most courteous exposition.
Mer. Thou hast most kindly hit it.
Rom. Meaning, to cursy.
man to bow in the hams.
a
Mer. That's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains
case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
a
Rom. Pardon, good Mercutio. My business was great, and in such
Mer. The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive?
Rom. Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
fairly last night.
salutation to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit
French
but not to the purpose. Signior Romeo, bon jour! There's a
so,
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, This be a gray eye or
better love to berhyme her), Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy,
had a
in. Laura, to his lady, was but a kitchen wench (marry, she
flowed
thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch
art
Mer. Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh, how
Ben. Here comes Romeo! here comes Romeo!

Enter Romeo.

bench? O, their bones, their bones!
much on the new form that they cannot sit at ease on the old
so
flies, these fashion-mongers, these pardona-mi's, who stand
grandsir, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange
man! a very good whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,
tall
new tuners of accent! 'By Jesu, a very good blade! a very
these
Mer. The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasticoes-
Ben. The what?
immortal passado! the punto reverse! the hay.
the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah, the
of
butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist! a gentleman
minim rest, one, two, and the third in your bosom! the very
pricksong-keeps time, distance, and proportion; rests me his
courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing
Mer. More than Prince of Cats, I can tell you. O, he's the
Ben. Why, what is Tybalt?
and is he a man to encounter Tybalt?
butt-shaft;
very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's
wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a love song; the
Mer. Alas, poor Romeo, he is already dead! stabb'd with a white
dared.
being
Ben. Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he dares,
Mer. Any man that can write may answer a letter.
Ben. Romeo will answer it.
Mer. A challenge, on my life.
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
Ben. Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,
Torments him so that he will sure run mad.
Mer. Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline,
Ben. Not to his father's. I spoke with his man.
Came he not home to-night?
Mer. Where the devil should this Romeo be?

Enter Benvolio and Mercutio.

A street.
Scene IV.




Exeunt.
Friar. Wisely, and slow. They stumble that run fast.
Rom. O, let us hence! I stand on sudden haste.
To turn your households' rancour to pure love.
For this alliance may so happy prove
In one respect I'll thy assistant be;
But come, young waverer, come go with me.
Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.
Friar. O, she knew well
The other did not so.
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.
Rom. I pray thee chide not. She whom I love now
To lay one in, another out to have.
Friar. Not in a grave
Rom. And bad'st me bury love.
Friar. For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
Rom. Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.
Women may fall when there's no strength in men.
And art thou chang'd? Pronounce this sentence then:
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.
If e'er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet.
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Thy old groans ring yet in mine ancient ears.
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
Jesu Maria! What a deal of brine
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
So soon forsaken? Young men's love then lies
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
Friar. Holy Saint Francis! What a change is here!
That thou consent to marry us to-day.
I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
We met, we woo'd, and made exchange of vow,
By holy marriage. When, and where, and how
And all combin'd, save what thou must combine
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet;
Rom. Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
Friar. Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift
My intercession likewise steads my foe.
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
Within thy help and holy physic lies.
That's by me wounded. Both our remedies
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
Rom. I'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
Friar. That's my good son! But where hast thou been then?
I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.
Rom. With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.
Friar. God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?
Rom. That last is true-the sweeter rest was mine.
Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.
Or if not so, then here I hit it right-
Thou art uprous'd with some distemp'rature ;
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain
And where care lodges sleep will never lie;
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed.
Young son, it argues a distempered head
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Friar. Benedicite!
Rom. Good morrow, father.

Enter Romeo.

Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
And where the worser is predominant,
In man as well as herbs- grace and rude will;
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
Poison hath residence, and medicine power;
Within the infant rind of this small flower
And vice sometime's by action dignified.
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Nor aught so good but, strain'd from that fair use,
But to the earth some special good doth give;
For naught so vile that on the earth doth live
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities;
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
None but for some, and yet all different.
Many for many virtues excellent,
We sucking on her natural bosom find;
And from her womb children of divers kind
What is her burying gave, that is her womb;
The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb.
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
I must up-fill this osier cage of ours
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
Non, ere the sun advance his burning eye
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels.
And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels
Check'ring the Eastern clouds with streaks of light;
Friar. The grey-ey'd morn smiles on the frowning night,

Enter Friar, [Laurence] alone, with a basket.

Friar Laurence's cell.
Scene III.




Exit
His help to crave and my dear hap to tell.
Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
Rom. Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
[Exit.]
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
Good night, good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow,
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Jul. Sweet, so would I.
Rom. I would I were thy bird.
So loving-jealous of his liberty.
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
That lets it hop a little from her hand,
And yet no farther than a wanton's bird,
Jul. 'Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone-
Forgetting any other home but this.
Rom. And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Rememb'ring how I love thy company.
Jul. I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Rom. Let me stand here till thou remember it.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.
Jul. I will not fail. 'Tis twenty years till then.
Rom. By the hour of nine.
Shall I send to thee?
Jul. At what o'clock to-morrow
Rom. My dear?
Jul. Romeo!
Like softest music to attending ears!
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
Rom. It is my soul that calls upon my name.
Romeo!
With repetition of my Romeo's name.
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud;
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
Jul. Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falconer's voice

Enter Juliet again, [above].

But love from love, towards school with heavy looks.
Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books;
Rom. A thousand times the worse, to want thy light!
Jul. A thousand times good night!                        Exit.
Rom. So thrive my soul-
To-morrow will I send.
To cease thy suit and leave me to my grief.
Jul. By-and-by I come.-
Nurse. (within) Madam!
I do beseech thee-
Jul. I come, anon.- But if thou meanest not well,
Nurse. (within) Madam!
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
Jul. Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.

Enter Juliet above.

Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Rom. O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard,
Stay but a little, I will come again.                [Exit.]
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
[Nurse] calls within.
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu!
The more I have, for both are infinite.
My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
And yet I wish but for the thing I have.
Jul. But to be frank and give it thee again.
Rom. Would'st thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?
And yet I would it were to give again.
Jul. I gave thee mine before thou didst request it;
Rom. Th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.
Jul. What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?
Rom. O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
Come to thy heart as that within my breast!
Good night, good night! As sweet repose and rest
May prove a beauteous flow'r when next we meet.
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night!
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
It is too rash, too unadvis'd, too sudden;
I have no joy of this contract to-night.
Jul. Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,
Rom. If my heart's dear love-
And I'll believe thee.
Which is the god of my idolatry,
Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Jul. Do not swear at all;
Rom. What shall I swear by?
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
Jul. O, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon,
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops-
Rom. Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear,
Which the dark night hath so discovered.
And not impute this yielding to light love,
My true-love passion. Therefore pardon me,
But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
And therefore thou mayst think my haviour light;
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.
I'll frown, and be perverse, and say thee nay,
Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.
They say Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
Thou mayst prove false. At lovers' perjuries,
And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear'st,
Dost thou love me, I know thou wilt say 'Ay';
What I have spoke; but farewell compliment!
Fain would I dwell on form- fain, fain deny
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night.
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
Jul. Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face;
I would adventure for such merchandise.
As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
Rom. By love, that first did prompt me to enquire.
Jul. By whose direction found'st thou out this place?
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.
My life were better ended by their hate
And but thou love me, let them find me here.
Rom. I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;
Jul. I would not for the world they saw thee here.
And I am proof against their enmity.
Than twenty of their swords! Look thou but sweet,
Rom. Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Jul. If they do see thee, they will murther thee.
Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.
And what love can do, that dares love attempt.
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
Rom. With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls;
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
And the place death, considering who thou art,
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
Jul. How cam'st thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
Rom. Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound.
Jul. My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
Had I it written, I would tear the word.
Because it is an enemy to thee.
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
I know not how to tell thee who I am.
Rom. By a name
So stumblest on my counsel?
Jul. What man art thou that, thus bescreen'd in night,
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptiz'd;
Rom. I take thee at thy word.
Take all myself.
And for that name, which is no part of thee,
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name;
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,
By any other name would smell as sweet.
What's in a name? That which we call a rose
Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!
Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
Jul. 'Tis but thy name that is my enemy.
Rom. [aside] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
Deny thy father and refuse thy name!
Jul. O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?
And sails upon the bosom of the air.
When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
Unto the white-upturned wond'ring eyes
As is a winged messenger of heaven
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head,
O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art
Rom. She speaks.
Jul. Ay me!
That I might touch that cheek!
O that I were a glove upon that hand,
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
Would through the airy region stream so bright
As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
I am too bold; 'tis not to me she speaks.
Her eye discourses; I will answer it.
She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that?
O that she knew she were!
It is my lady; O, it is my love!
And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off.
Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
Be not her maid, since she is envious.
That thou her maid art far more fair than she.
Who is already sick and pale with grief
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
It is the East, and Juliet is the sun!
But soft! What light through yonder window breaks?

Enter Juliet above at a window.

Rom. He jests at scars that never felt a wound.

Enter Romeo.

Capulet's orchard.
Scene II.




Exeunt.
'To seek him here that means not to be found.
Ben. Go then, for 'tis in vain
Come, shall we go?
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.
Romeo, good night. I'll to my truckle-bed;
An open et cetera, thou a pop'rin pear!
O, Romeo, that she were, O that she were
As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
Now will he sit under a medlar tree
Mer. If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
To be consorted with the humorous night.
Ben. Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
I conjure only but to raise up him.
Is fair and honest: in his mistress' name,
That were some spite; my invocation
Till she had laid it and conjur'd it down.
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
Mer. This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him
Ben. An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
That in thy likeness thou appear to us!
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes.
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
He heareth not, he stirreth not, be moveth not;
When King Cophetua lov'd the beggar maid!
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim
One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove';
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied!
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh;
Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
Mer. Nay, I'll conjure too.
Call, good Mercutio.
Ben. He ran this way, and leapt this orchard wall.
And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.
Mer. He is wise,
Ben. Romeo! my cousin Romeo! Romeo!

Enter Benvolio with Mercutio.

[Climbs the wall and leaps down within it.]
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.
Rom. Can I go forward when my heart is here?

Enter Romeo alone.

A lane by the wall of Capulet's orchard.
ACT II. Scene I.




Exit.
Temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet.
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
To meet her new beloved anywhere;
And she as much in love, her means much less
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
Being held a foe, he may not have access
And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks.
But to his foe suppos'd he must complain,
Alike bewitched by the charm of looks;
Now Romeo is belov'd, and loves again,
With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.
That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
And young affection gapes to be his heir;
Chor. Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,

Enter Chorus.

PROLOGUE







Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.        Exeunt.
Nurse. Anon, anon!
One calls within, 'Juliet.'
Of one I danc'd withal.
Jul. A rhyme I learnt even now
Nurse. What's this? what's this?
That I must love a loathed enemy.
Prodigious birth of love it is to me
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Jul. My only love, sprung from my only hate!
The only son of your great enemy.
Nurse. His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
Jul. Go ask his name.- If he be married,
Nurse. I know not.
Jul. What's he that follows there, that would not dance?
Nurse. Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.
Jul. What's he that now is going out of door?
Nurse. The son and heir of old Tiberio.
Jul. Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?
Exeunt [all but Juliet and Nurse].
I'll to my rest.
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late;
bed.
More torches here! [Exeunt Maskers.] Come on then, let's to
I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night.
Is it e'en so? Why then, I thank you all.
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
Cap. Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;
Rom. Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.
Ben. Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.
O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.
Rom. Is she a Capulet?
Shall have the chinks.
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
I nurs'd her daughter that you talk'd withal.
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.
Her mother is the lady of the house.
Nurse. Marry, bachelor,
Rom. What is her mother?
Nurse. Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
Jul. You kiss by th' book.
Give me my sin again.                          [Kisses her.]
Rom. Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urg'd!
Jul. Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purg'd.  [Kisses her.]
Rom. Then move not while my prayer's effect I take.
Jul. Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
They pray; grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
Rom. O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do!
Jul. Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in pray'r.
Rom. Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
Jul. Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:
Rom. If I profane with my unworthiest hand
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitt'rest gall.          Exit.
I will withdraw; but this intrusion shall,
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
Tyb. Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
I'll make you quiet; what!- Cheerly, my hearts!
Be quiet, or- More light, more light!- For shame!
Well said, my hearts!- You are a princox- go!
You must contrary me! Marry, 'tis time.-
This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what.
You are a saucy boy. Is't so, indeed?
Cap. Go to, go to!
Tyb. Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.
You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!
You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
You'll not endure him? God shall mend my soul!
Am I the master here, or you? Go to!
What, goodman boy? I say he shall. Go to!
Cap. He shall be endur'd.
I'll not endure him.
Tyb. It fits when such a villain is a guest.
An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
It is my will; the which if thou respect,
Therefore be patient, take no note of him.
Here in my house do him disparagement.
I would not for the wealth of all this town
To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth.
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
'A bears him like a portly gentleman,
Cap. Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone.
Tyb. 'Tis he, that villain Romeo.
Cap. Young Romeo is it?
To scorn at our solemnity this night.
A villain, that is hither come in spite
Tyb. Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe;
Cap. Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.
Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,
Fetch me my rapier, boy. What, dares the slave
Tyb. This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight!
And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand
As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
Like a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear-
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
Rom. O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
Serv. I know not, sir.
Of yonder knight?
hand
Rom. [to a Servingman] What lady's that, which doth enrich the
His son was but a ward two years ago.
Cap. Will you tell me that?
His son is thirty.
2. Cap. 'Tis more, 'tis more! His son is elder, sir;
Some five-and-twenty years, and then we mask'd.
Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
Cap. What, man? 'Tis not so much, 'tis not so much!
2. Cap. By'r Lady, thirty years.
Were in a mask?
How long is't now since last yourself and I
For you and I are past our dancing days.
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,
Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well.
And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
More light, you knaves! and turn the tables up,
Music plays, and they dance.
A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.
You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians, play.
Such as would please. 'Tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone!
A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
That I have worn a visor and could tell
Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
She I'll swear hath corns. Am I come near ye now?
Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all
Unplagu'd with corns will have a bout with you.
Cap. Welcome, gentlemen! Ladies that have their toes

and Gentlewomen to the Maskers.
Juliet, Tybalt, and all the Guests
Enter the Maskers, Enter, [with Servants,] Capulet, his Wife,

Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.      Exeunt.
3. Serv. We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys!
for, in the great chamber.
sought
1. Serv. You are look'd for and call'd for, ask'd for and
2. Serv. Ay, boy, ready.
Anthony, and Potpan!
Nell.
thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and
to the plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane and, as
look
1. Serv. Away with the join-stools, remove the court-cubbert,
and they unwash'd too, 'tis a foul thing.
hands,
2. Serv. When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's
He shift a trencher! he scrape a trencher!
1. Serv. Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away?

Servingmen come forth with napkins.

Capulet's house.
Scene V.




They march about the stage. [Exeunt.]
Ben. Strike, drum.
Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen!
But he that hath the steerage of my course
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
Of a despised life, clos'd in my breast,
With this night's revels and expire the term
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
Some consequence, yet hanging in the stars,
Rom. I fear, too early; for my mind misgives
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
Ben. This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.
Turning his face to the dew-dropping South.
And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
Even now the frozen bosom of the North
And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
Which is as thin of substance as the air,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy;
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Mer. True, I talk of dreams;
Thou talk'st of nothing.
Rom. Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!
This is she-
Making them women of good carriage.
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
Which once untangled much misfortune bodes
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish, hairs,
That plats the manes of horses in the night
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
And being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
Of healths five fadom deep; and then anon
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Sometimes she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
Then dreams he of another benefice.
Tickling a parson's nose as 'a lies asleep,
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees;
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on cursies straight;
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
And in this state she 'gallops night by night
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
Not half so big as a round little worm
Her wagoner, a small grey-coated gnat,
Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;
Her collars, of the moonshine's wat'ry beams;
Her traces, of the smallest spider's web;
The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
Her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs,
Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;
Drawn with a team of little atomies
On the forefinger of an alderman,
In shape no bigger than an agate stone
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
Mer. O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
Rom. In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.
Mer. That dreamers often lie.
Rom. Well, what was yours?
Mer. And so did I.
Rom. I dreamt a dream to-night.
Mer. Why, may one ask?
But 'tis no wit to go.
Rom. And we mean well, in going to this masque;
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
Mer. I mean, sir, in delay
Rom. Nay, that's not so.
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
If thou art Dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
Mer. Tut! dun's the mouse, the constable's own word!
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.
I'll be a candle-holder and look on;
For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase,
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels;
Rom. A torch for me! Let wantons light of heart
But every man betake him to his legs.
Ben. Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
What curious eye doth quote deformities?
A visor for a visor! What care I
Give me a case to put my visage in.
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Mer. If love be rough with you, be rough with love.
Too rude, too boist'rous, and it pricks like thorn.
Rom. Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
Too great oppression for a tender thing.
Mer. And, to sink in it, should you burthen love-
Under love's heavy burthen do I sink.
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
To soar with his light feathers; and so bound
Rom. I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
And soar with them above a common bound.
Mer. You are a lover. Borrow Cupid's wings
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
With nimble soles; I have a soul of lead
Rom. Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes
Mer. Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
Rom. Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling.
We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.
But, let them measure us by what they will,
After the prompter, for our entrance;
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper;
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,
Ben. The date is out of such prolixity.
Or shall we on without apology?
Rom. What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?

Torchbearers.
Enter Romeo, Mercutio, Benvolio, with five or six other Maskers;

A street.
Scene IV.




Exeunt.
Nurse. Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
Juliet, the County stays.
Wife. We follow thee.                       Exit [Servingman].
follow straight.
everything in extremity. I must hence to wait. I beseech you
young lady ask'd for, the nurse curs'd in the pantry, and
my
Serv. Madam, the guests are come, supper serv'd up, you call'd,

Enter Servingman.

Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Jul. I'll look to like, if looking liking move;
Wife. Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?
Nurse. No less? Nay, bigger! Women grow by men
By having him making yourself no less.
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
For fair without the fair within to hide.
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
To beautify him only lacks a cover.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
Find written in the margent of his eyes,
And what obscur'd in this fair volume lies
And see how one another lends content;
Examine every married lineament,
And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
This night you shall behold him at our feast.
Wife. What say you? Can you love the gentleman?
Nurse. Nay, he's a flower, in faith- a very flower.
Wife. Verona's summer hath not such a flower.
As all the world- why he's a man of wax.
Nurse. A man, young lady! lady, such a man
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
I was your mother much upon these years
Are made already mothers. By my count,
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Wife. Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you,
I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
Nurse. An honour? Were not I thine only nurse,
Jul. It is an honour that I dream not of.
How stands your disposition to be married?
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
Wife. Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme
An I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nurs'd.
Nurse. Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
Jul. And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.
Wilt thou not, Jule?' It stinted, and said 'Ay.'
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
'Yea,' quoth my husband, 'fall'st upon thy face?
A perilous knock; and it cried bitterly.
A bump as big as a young cock'rel's stone;
And yet, I warrant, it bad upon it brow
To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'
Nurse. Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh
Wife. Enough of this. I pray thee hold thy peace.
And, pretty fool, it stinted, and said 'Ay.'
I never should forget it. 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he,
I warrant, an I should live a thousand yeas,
To see now how a jest shall come about!
The pretty wretch left crying, and said 'Ay.'
Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidam,
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?
'A was a merry man) took up the child.
And then my husband (God be with his soul!
For even the day before, she broke her brow;
She could have run and waddled all about;
For then she could stand high-lone; nay, by th' rood,
And since that time it is eleven years,
To bid me trudge.
Shake, quoth the dovehouse! 'Twas no need, I trow,
To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Nay, I do bear a brain. But, as I said,
My lord and you were then at Mantua.
Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
Of all the days of the year, upon that day;
And she was wean'd (I never shall forget it),
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen;
She was too good for me. But, as I said,
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
Susan and she (God rest all Christian souls!)
Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Nurse. Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Wife. A fortnight and odd days.
To Lammastide?
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four-
Nurse. I'll lay fourteen of my teeth-
Wife. She's not fourteen.
Nurse. Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.
I have rememb'red me, thou's hear our counsel.
We must talk in secret. Nurse, come back again;
Wife. This is the matter- Nurse, give leave awhile,
What is your will?
Jul. Madam, I am here.
Nurse. Your mother.
Jul. How now? Who calls?

Enter Juliet.

God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!
I bade her come. What, lamb! what ladybird!
Nurse. Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old,
Wife. Nurse, where's my daughter? Call her forth to me.

Enter Capulet's Wife, and Nurse.

Capulet's house.
Scene III.




But to rejoice in splendour of my own.              [Exeunt.]
Rom. I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
And she shall scant show well that now seems best.
That I will show you shining at this feast,
Your lady's love against some other maid
But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
Herself pois'd with herself in either eye;
Ben. Tut! you saw her fair, none else being by,
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.
One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
And these, who, often drown'd, could never die,
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
Rom. When the devout religion of mine eye
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
Go thither, and with unattainted eye
With all the admired beauties of Verona.
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lov'st;
Ben. At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
and crush a cup of wine. Rest you merry!               Exit.
come
Capulet; and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray
rich
Serv. Now I'll tell you without asking. My master is the great
Rom. Indeed I should have ask'd you that before.
Serv. My master's.
Rom. Whose house?
Serv. To supper, to our house.
Rom. Whither?
Serv. Up.
come?
[Gives back the paper.] A fair assembly. Whither should they

Lucio and the lively Helena.'
Signior Valentio and His cousin Tybalt;
My fair niece Rosaline and Livia;
Mine uncle Capulet, his wife, and daughters;
Mercutio and his brother Valentine;
Signior Placentio and His lovely nieces;
The lady widow of Vitruvio;
County Anselmo and his beauteous sisters;
'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;

Rom. Stay, fellow; I can read.                       He reads.
Serv. Ye say honestly. Rest you merry!
Rom. Ay, If I know the letters and the language.
read anything you see?
you
Serv. Perhaps you have learned it without book. But I pray, can
Rom. Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
Serv. God gi' go-den. I pray, sir, can you read?
Whipp'd and tormented and- God-den, good fellow.
Shut up in Prison, kept without my food,
Rom. Not mad, but bound more than a madman is;
Ben. Why, Romeo, art thou mad?
Rom. For your broken shin.
Ben. For what, I pray thee?
Rom. Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.
And the rank poison of the old will die.
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
One desperate grief cures with another's languish.
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
One pain is lessoned by another's anguish;
Ben. Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning;

Enter Benvolio and Romeo.

here writ. I must to the learned. In good time!
hath
here writ, and can never find what names the writing person
his nets; but I am sent to find those persons whose names are
with
with his last, the fisher with his pencil and the painter
that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor
Serv. Find them out whose names are written here? It is written
Exeunt [Capulet and Paris].
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay-
Whose names are written there, and to them say,
Through fair Verona; find those persons out
trudge about
sirrah,
Come, go with me. [To Servant, giving him a paper] Go,
May stand in number, though in reck'ning none.
Which, on more view of many, mine, being one,
And like her most whose merit most shall be;
Inherit at my house. Hear all, all see,
Among fresh female buds shall you this night
Of limping Winter treads, even such delight
When well apparell'd April on the heel
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.
At my poor house look to behold this night
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
Such as I love; and you among the store,
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
An she agree, within her scope of choice
My will to her consent is but a part.
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart;
She is the hopeful lady of my earth.
The earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she;
Cap. And too soon marr'd are those so early made.
Par. Younger than she are happy mothers made.
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Let two more summers wither in their pride
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;
My child is yet a stranger in the world,
Cap. But saying o'er what I have said before:
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
And pity 'tis you liv'd at odds so long.
Par. Of honourable reckoning are you both,
For men so old as we to keep the peace.
In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,
Cap. But Montague is bound as well as I,

Enter Capulet, County Paris, and [Servant] -the Clown.

A Street.
Scene II.




Ben. I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.      Exeunt.
Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.
Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair?
What doth her beauty serve but as a note
Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
Being black puts us in mind they hide the fair.
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows,
To call hers (exquisite) in question more.
Rom. 'Tis the way
Examine other beauties.
Ben. By giving liberty unto thine eyes.
Rom. O, teach me how I should forget to think!
Ben. Be rul'd by me: forget to think of her.
Do I live dead that live to tell it now.
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
To merit bliss by making me despair.
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
For beauty, starv'd with her severity,
Rom. She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
Ben. Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
That, when she dies, with beauty dies her store.
O, she's rich in beauty; only poor
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold.
Nor bide th' encounter of assailing eyes,
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
From Love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,
With Cupid's arrow. She hath Dian's wit,
Rom. Well, in that hit you miss. She'll not be hit
Ben. A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
Rom. A right good markman! And she's fair I love.
Ben. I aim'd so near when I suppos'd you lov'd.
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
Ah, word ill urg'd to one that is so ill!
Rom. Bid a sick man in sadness make his will.
But sadly tell me who.
Ben. Groan? Why, no;
Rom. What, shall I groan and tell thee?
Ben. Tell me in sadness, who is that you love?
This is not Romeo, he's some other where.
Rom. Tut! I have lost myself; I am not here:
An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
Ben. Soft! I will go along.
Farewell, my coz.
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.
What is it else? A madness most discreet,
Being vex'd, a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears.
Being purg'd, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;
Love is a smoke rais'd with the fume of sighs;
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown
Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Rom. Why, such is love's transgression.
Ben. At thy good heart's oppression.
Rom. Good heart, at what?
Ben. No, coz, I rather weep.
Dost thou not laugh?
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!
Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
O anything, of nothing first create!
Why then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
Should without eyes see pathways to his will!
Rom. Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
Ben. Alas that love, so gentle in his view,
Rom. Out of her favour where I am in love.
Ben. Of love?
Rom. Out-
Ben. In love?
Rom. Not having that which having makes them short.
Ben. It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?
Was that my father that went hence so fast?
Rom. Ay me! sad hours seem long.
Ben. But new struck nine.
Rom. Is the day so young?
Ben. Good morrow, cousin.
Exeunt [Montague and Wife].
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away,
Mon. I would thou wert so happy by thy stay
I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
Ben. See, where he comes. So please you step aside,

Enter Romeo.

We would as willingly give cure as know.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air
As is the bud bit with an envious worm
So far from sounding and discovery,
But to himself so secret and so close,
Is to himself- I will not say how true-
But he, his own affections' counsellor,
Mon. Both by myself and many other friend;
Ben. Have you importun'd him by any means?
Mon. I neither know it nor can learn of him
Ben. My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
Black and portentous must this humour prove
And makes himself an artificial night.
Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight
And private in his chamber pens himself,
Away from light steals home my heavy son
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
Should in the farthest East bean to draw
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,
Mon. Many a morning hath he there been seen,
And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.
Pursu'd my humour, not Pursuing his,
Being one too many by my weary self-
Which then most sought where most might not be found,
I- measuring his affections by my own,
And stole into the covert of the wood.
Towards him I made; but he was ware of me
So early walking did I see your son.
That westward rooteth from the city's side,
Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;
Peer'd forth the golden window of the East,
Ben. Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
M. Wife. O, where is Romeo? Saw you him to-day?
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
Came more and more, and fought on part and part,
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
Who, nothing hurt withal, hiss'd him in scorn.
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
Which, as he breath'd defiance to my ears,
The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepar'd;
I drew to part them. In the instant came
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.
Ben. Here were the servants of your adversary
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
Mon. Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Exeunt [all but Montague, his Wife, and Benvolio].
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
To old Freetown, our common judgment place.
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
And, Montague, come you this afternoon,
You, Capulet, shall go along with me;
For this time all the rest depart away.
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Cank'red with peace, to part your cank'red hate.
To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments
And made Verona's ancient citizens
Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
With purple fountains issuing from your veins!
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,
Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel-
Prince. Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,

Enter Prince Escalus, with his Train.

M. Wife. Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.
Mon. Thou villain Capulet!- Hold me not, let me go.

Enter Old Montague and his Wife.

And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
Cap. My sword, I say! Old Montague is come
Wife. A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?
Cap. What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!

Enter Old Capulet in his gown, and his Wife.

Citizens. Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!
Officer. Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! beat them down!

partisans.
Enter an officer, and three or four Citizens with clubs or

Have at thee, coward!                            They fight.
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.
Tyb. What, drawn, and talk of peace? I hate the word
Or manage it to part these men with me.
Ben. I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,
Turn thee Benvolio! look upon thy death.
Tyb. What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?

Enter Tybalt.

Put up your swords. You know not what you do.
Ben. Part, fools! [Beats down their swords.]
They fight.
Samp. Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy swashing blow.
Abr. You lie.
Samp. Yes, better, sir.
master's kinsmen.
Greg. [aside to Sampson] Say 'better.' Here comes one of my

Enter Benvolio.

Samp. Well, sir.
Abr. No better.
you.
Samp. But if you do, sir, am for you. I serve as good a man as
Abr. Quarrel, sir? No, sir.
Greg. Do you quarrel, sir?
thumb, sir.
my
Samp. No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir; but I bite
Greg. [aside to Sampson] No.
Samp. [aside to Gregory] Is the law of our side if I say ay?
Abr. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Samp. I do bite my thumb, sir.
Abr. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
disgrace to them, if they bear it.
Samp. Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them; which is
list.
Greg. I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they
Samp. Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.
Greg. No, marry. I fear thee!
Samp. Fear me not.
Greg. How? turn thy back and run?
Samp. My naked weapon is out. Quarrel! I will back thee.

Enter two other Servingmen [Abram and Balthasar].

Montagues.
poor-John. Draw thy tool! Here comes two of the house of
been
Greg. 'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou hadst
am a pretty piece of flesh.
known I
Samp. Me they shall feel while I am able to stand; and 'tis
Greg. They must take it in sense that feel it.
Take it in what sense thou wilt.
Samp. Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads.
Greg. The heads of the maids?
their heads.
with the men, I will be cruel with the maids- I will cut off
fought
Samp. 'Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant. When I have
Greg. The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
from the wall and thrust his maids to the wall.
ever thrust to the wall. Therefore I will push Montague's men
are
Samp. 'Tis true; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels,
wall.
Greg. That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes to the
wall of any man or maid of Montague's.
the
Samp. A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I will take
Therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.
Greg. To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand.
Samp. A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
Greg. But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
Samp. I strike quickly, being moved.
Greg. Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.
Samp. I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.
Greg. No, for then we should be colliers.
Samp. Gregory, on my word, we'll not carry coals.

of Capulet.
Enter Sampson and Gregory (with swords and bucklers) of the house

Verona. A public place.
ACT I. Scene I.






[Exit.]
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
The which if you with patient ears attend,
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
Which, but their children's end, naught could remove,
And the continuance of their parents' rage,
The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love,
Doth with their death bury their parents' strife.
Whose misadventur'd piteous overthrows
A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,
Chor. Two households, both alike in dignity,

Enter Chorus.

THE PROLOGUE



SCENE.--Verona; Mantua.

Attendants.
Maskers, Torchbearers, Pages, Guards, Watchmen, Servants, and
Citizens of Verona; Gentlemen and Gentlewomen of both houses;

Nurse to Juliet.
Juliet, daughter to Capulet.
Lady Capulet, wife to Capulet.
Lady Montague, wife to Montague.

An Officer.
Three Musicians.
An Apothecary.
Peter, servant to Juliet's nurse.
Gregory, servant to Capulet.
Sampson, servant to Capulet.
Abram, servant to Montague.
Balthasar, servant to Romeo.
Friar John, Franciscan.
Friar Laurence, Franciscan.
Tybalt, nephew to Lady Capulet.
Benvolio, nephew to Montague, and friend to Romeo
Mercutio, kinsman to the Prince and friend to Romeo.
Tybalt, nephew to Lady Capulet.
Romeo, son to Montague.
An old Man, of the Capulet family.
Capulet, heads of two houses at variance with each other.
Montague, heads of two houses at variance with each other.
Paris, a young Count, kinsman to the Prince.
Escalus, Prince of Verona.

Chorus.

Dramatis Personae



by William Shakespeare

THE TRAGEDY OF ROMEO AND JULIET
